## About Sightreading.training

This site is a way for you to practice [sight reading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sight-reading) by playing randomly generated sheet music. It's not designed for learning existing songs. You'll need to have some basic knowldge of reading sheet music to begin with, but even without you should be able to figure things out by experimenting.

### How this site works

This website randomly generates notes for you to sight read and play. This will ensure that you're always reading and never playing from memory. Since the music is randomly generated by a computer, it won't always sound good. A secondary goal of this project is to generate music that resembles a genre or style, but in the meantime we recommend you supplement practice with real music as well.

When using the app you'll be preseneted with a sheet music view where notes will scroll in from the right as you play each one. In the simplest mode you'll play one note at a time, but you can increase complexity by by clicking into configure, and adding more notes. Additionally you can control key signature, and the staves that are shown.

There are many different configuration options to control the random music generator. You can click the **Configure** button above the staff to chnage these setings. There's a glossary below with descriptions of each parameter.

### Using a MIDI keyboard

Although it's possible to play using your mouse or computer keyboard, we recommend connecting your digital piano or MIDI keyboard to your computer so you can play directly into the software.

In addition to making it easy to finger chords, it's crucial for developing your spacial awareness of where notes are on the keyboard.

MIDI support is only available in Chrome at this time.

### Shotcomings

This app is far from complete. Here are some planned improvements:

*   Various rhythm modes, different time signatures
*   Note generators that generate particular styles of music (Waltz, Four part harmony, Pop, etc.)
*   A built in piano tone for those without audio set up

If you'd like to contribute to this app, you can find the source code on GitHub: [https://github.com/leafo/mursicjs](https://github.com/leafo/mursicjs)

### Tips for successful sight reading

> The creator of this website is not a professional musician and is a student of sight reading just like you. These tips are just observations from his own learnings. If you have any suggestions based on your experience please get in touch.

#### Practice daily

Sight reading takes a long time to learn. Practice frequently to make reading notes second nature. You goal should be able to see notes and instantly know where to move your hands.

You'll find that as you get quicker, it's easier to play a note than it is to think about what the name of it is. Competant sight readers are ab le
